{% include fsh-link-references.md %}

### Introduction

Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) are revolutionizing the field of healthcare, providing various tools and techniques that can help to improve diagnosis, treatment, and patient outcomes. One of the many areas where AI can make a major impact in the field of healthcare is in the integrative analysis and interpretation of genomic data. With the growing amount and improved quality of available genomic data, AI will play an increasingly important role by helping researchers and clinicians to better understand the role of genetics on complex traits, and to develop more effective treatments for each patient.

The Bridge2AI Voice as a Biomarker of Health (VBAI) project aims to combine genomic, clinical, bio-acoustic data from healthcare units across multiple institutes for scientific inquiry and AI/ML algorithm development. With genomic data being generated by different institutions and platforms, ensuring that data can be easily shared and integrated is crucial. The process of harmonizing genomic data from different sources and platforms will greatly benefit from adaptation of consistent data standards. Harmonized data will improve AI-based genomic data analysis by providing larger and more diverse collections of data.

This implementation guide is developed as an effort to propose standardized genomic data collection and generation for the VBAI project, and as a part of the overarching FHIR profiles for the VBAI study [https://kind-lab.github.io/vbai-fhir/](https://kind-lab.github.io/vbai-fhir/). This guide and profiles are based on [FHIR R5](https://hl7.org/fhir/r5/) and [Genomic Reporting Implementation Guide 2.0.0](http://hl7.org/fhir/uv/genomics-reporting/). 


### Organization of this guide

This implementation guide consists of the FHIR profiles and resources created to support standardization of:

1. [the procedures by which genomic data were generated](2_workflow.html).
2. [the quality metrics of the genomic data](3_metric.html).
3. [the representation for the observed genetic variants](4_variant_representation.html).

### Overview

The reltionship between profiles to represent the genomic data (including relevant information) for each patient can be summarised as follows.
It is assumed that bulk genomic data files (e.g., FASTQs, BAMs, VCFs) are stored in separate system with unique url for each file and are accessible from EHR.

{% include img.html img="assets/images/single-patient.png" %}

Here, all patients consisting the same cohort (i.e., sharing the specimen collection or WGS workflow) can reference the same resources.

{% include img.html img="assets/images/cohort.png" %}

### Profiles
- [VbaiBiospecimen]
- [VbaiGenomicStudy]
- [VbaiGenomicQualityMetric]
- [VbaiGenomicsReport]
- [VbaiVariant]
